---
layout: post
title: Humanities Studies in Games
---

As addressed in my [previous post](https://sojkowski.github.io/IDH-blog/2020/11/05/humanities-gaming-post.html), video games are a medium ripe with potential as its use for simulating reality and alternative realities is unparalleled. 


Video Games as a medium put an engaged player in an imitated situation or process. By exploring and interacting with this simulation, they are actively learning the unique set of rules applied to the simulation they entered while simultaneously discovering what the game considers "success" and "failure."

These dynamics can and should be studied, analyzed, and criticized like we already do with other forms of art, narratives, economic policies, and social policies. Being from a university that pairs Social Sciences and Humanities under one roof, I find them a bit inseparable in my mind. I think this is the case not just because of the habitual pairing but also because of their inherent natures. The Social Sciences deal with aspects of human society and the Humanities deal with human culture (a product of human society), so they very often inform one another. I can see scholars perhaps finding the STEM-like qualities of video games daunting, but it seems impossible to deny that Video Games are indeed part of human culture. Furthermore, I believe that one can study Video Game art, sound design, choice/interaction mechanics (such as in-game relationships or economies), and narrative without having to understand the C++ (or other coding languages) that make the game possible. Similarly, I can study the mise-en-scène, score, or narrative of a film without having to understand the chemical process that records a scene on a physically exposed film strip (nor do I need to understand the current magic of how film is recorded digitally).

So I propose here that this medium of Video Games is directly tied to Humanities studies and Digital Humanities studies, as areas of these studies are _already_ latent in video games just waiting to be picked up. As I personally have a background in Literary Studies, International Film and the Representation of Cultures, and Queer Theory; I can explore these same exact theories as they appear in video games like I would with other mediums such as prose, poetry, comics, film, or archival structures.

## Why would academic criticism about video games be useful?

As Douglas Wolk wrote in reference to the growing field of comics "[c]ritical analysis and strong opinions are a necessary response to any art" (16). Video Games already take up the mantel of themes and devices found in other humanities and humanities-related fields such as Literary Studies, Art Studies, Sociology and Anthropology studies, and one could even argue for its relevance of study in the fields of Economics, Political Science, and Psychology. I could study a game narrative very similarly to how I would study a printed prose novel. I could study game graphics and game color schemes like I might study art and art history. Sociology, anthropology, and psychology could study relationship networks, warring factions, mental health representation, the list goes on and on. How these representations in video game simulations inform and/or impact the minds of a large swath of our society is something we need to stop ignoring. How video games accurately or inaccurately reflect the nuances of these fields is part of the reason why I would argue they need to be studied more seriously. 

As an example, I would personally love to read a study about video game economies-- especially in prominent franchises like _Mario_ or _Pokémon_ that have money systems as well as "rare" items such as the ultra shroom (In _Paper Mario_ for example, you can only find three per game) or the masterball (you only get one per game). From my own personal experiences and from the discourses I have been a part of online, my impressions has been that these "rare" items tend to get hoarded as players are scared they won't have the rare item when they "need it", and then never use it at all. Continuing in the vein of potential economic studies, I'd be interested to read if a player interaction with video game economies mimics or differs from their real-world economic tendencies. As someone with no academic background in Economics (or several of the fields listed above) I would like to use this space to encourage others to seriously consider video game narratives, aesthetics, and mechanics in a critical way.


It would be valuable to explore some of the ways it's possible to embody video game characters and environments, as well as to peel back the layers to show the ways that video game mechanics directly impact that experience. By game mechanics I would like to specify here that I mean the available choices a player can make, not the literal machine of a gaming console. This is not to say that the coding or hardware could or should not be studied, but I personally have an interest in exploring the player's side of the video game experience. Much like I would be in my literary studies, I'm interested in what players (equivalent to _readers_ in my line of work) take away from an experience and how and why that is the case.


## What Remains of Edith Finch: A Case for Humanities Studies

_What Remains of Edith Finch_ (2017) is a video game released for Windows (computers), and the PlayStation 4, Xbox One, and Nintendo Switch (consoles). The player starts the game sitting on a ferryboat, where they are allowed to move the point of view (POV) around a fixed point. Upon looking down, you discover the first simulation rule: you're in first person. The POV is a set of eyes attached to a body— you have been moving your head so far, but not your body. That first act of looking down discovers your/Edith's body, and also details about that body. She has a broken right wrist, an old journal with her name on it, and a bundle of what appear to be peace lilies which are often given to express sympathy after someone's passing. 

Opening the notebook initiates the game. What made this game special right from the get-go (at least the Windows version which I experienced) is that it uses the computer mouse to mime all of the motions. Where a film or a book you may see a door open, in _Edith Finch_ the player has to physically mime the turning involved in using door handles and in the case of the opening scene: turning the page. This mechanic eliminates narrative distance apparent in other forms of media by manifesting a world to interact with and taking personification to a whole new level by incarnating the user as Edith.

The rest of the game continues in a future time period, where the player embodies an older Edith returning to her abandoned family home. As a first-person exploration game, the player searches for traces of Edith's family within and around the family home. While the goal of each scenario is to be disorienting as the player and Edith discover new information, the player is gently prodded in 'correct' directions by the rewards of Edith's continued narration in both visual and auditory formats. For example, when you first arrive at the abandoned house, you are free to walk around the yard but you know you've found the 'right' place when the narration (and therefore the forward progression of the game) continues at the front door.

_Edith Finch_ examines family dynamics and the human condition by slowing revealing the different members that make up the Finch family tree. It subtly uses magical-realism to show and embody circumstances that could not be captured in any other medium. One such instance is the sequence of Edith's older brother Lewis. Newly sober from substance abuse, Lewis finds a job at a local salmon cannery and notices the monotony of his daily life. When the player picks up a letter, they are transported and become incarnated in Lewis's body for a short time, moving his hand to chop the heads off of salmon. As they discover their new body and salmon start piling up, the player realizes that they need to use the computer's mouse to grab fish from the left of the screen as they get dumped, drag them to the right for a machine to chop off the head, and then push the fish upwards onto a conveyor belt for further processing. Simple, monotonous motions: grab, chop, push. 

Slowly, a vision starts to form in the top left corner of the screen. After several moments of confusion, the player realizes that the vision is an RPG, or a "Role Playing Game" that is navigated using the W, A, S and D keys of the keyboard. For consoles, the fish movement is conveyed with the right stick and the RPG movement is conveyed with the left stick. The player must do both simultaneously to progress through the game. If one gets too behind in the fish cannery reality the fish physically obscure the vision's reality from view, and if one does nothing but chop fish they will never finish this sequence of the game. As the player successfully starts progresses through both worlds, the vision's fantasy world becomes more elaborate and the vision slowly expands across the screen until you can no longer even see the cannery. Fish fall across the vision and muscle memory guides the players hand to where the guillotine _should_ be and where the conveyor belt _should_ be. Lewis, who struggles with identifying reality, is enabled by the video game to fully encompass the player and has forced the player to, at least temporarily, live and see as he does.

This post is getting long but I think a deep analysis of _Edith Finch's_ narrative structure, a further look into devices that facilitate embodiment, representation of mental health, and a comparison/contrast paper with a similar work of prose are all humanities areas of study that can be researched with this video game.


For those interested, [here](https://youtu.be/_Jkioa2UQl8?t=1104) is a Let's Play of this _Edith Finch_ scene that depicts a similar player reaction to what I described above (between 18:24 and 29:10). A "Let's Play" is a video stream of a user documenting their playthrough of a video game, usually including commentary or a camera view of the their face.



**Bibliography**

Wolk, Douglas. _Reading Comics: How Graphic Novels Work and What They Mean_. Cambridge: Da Capo Press, 2007. Print.