---
layout: post
title: Studying Emphasis in Pride and Prejudice
---

As I mentioned in my last post, a big reason why I enjoy the Digital Humanities is the flexibility it affords me. Research can very easily change course depending on what programs I use and what occurrences I find interesting. The idea behind this post was discovered by accident during a class discussion on using text files from Project Gutenburg in relation to 'cleaning data' with Regular Expression.

For those who don't know, [Project Gutenburg](https://www.gutenberg.org) is an online database that digitally publishes and distributes eBooks for free in various file forms (typically in HTML, EPUB, Kindle, and Plain Text files). Since this is a free resource, the texts available are generally ones that have fallen out of copyright. 

Regular Expression is a concept that uses textual syntax in a mathematical notation in order to match text. For example, using [a-z] will find matches for all lowercase letters in my defined search range. With more complicated notations and a search range of a full text, I can examine patterns in a novel quite quickly! I used [Regular Expressions 101](https://regex101.com) as my tool.

A text from Project Gutenburg that I wanted to look at was Pride and Prejudice by Jane Austen, which I'm ashamed to admit I've never read. It stood out to me because many of my peers have read it, and it just so happened to be Project Gutenburg's most frequently downloaded eBook in the last 30 days. Additionally, I thought that selecting a text I have not read would allow me to work without preconceived notions.

So I opened up the plain text file of Pride and Prejudice and completed several steps before my text was 'ready' for experimentation. Project Gutenburg files comes with metadate before the text, as well as their license after the text, which I removed so that I could study just the text itself. As I was doing so, I noticed that several words in Austen's text were enclosed in underscores. Skimming through, I thought this was odd. An underscore as a symbol is meant for emphasis, specifically in a digital environment an underscore (\_) creates the italic aesthetic. For example, I use Markdown to create this blog post you see now— and to make something _italic_ I need to actually type out this: \_italic\_

A quick look into the HTML version of my text showed that these same words were indeed italicized, the plain text version simply does not show italics. Yet the emphasis was still maintained, with the rather clunky visible underscores through the text I wanted to study, indicating to me that the use of emphasis was important to the reader's interpretation as it was not information that was allowed to be lost in the plain text version. When I speak of "emphasis", I mean *the articulated stress laid on a word or words to indicate special meaning or particular importance*. You could easily replicate Pride and Prejudice without emphasis, but it may change the meaning or connotations of a word, or perhaps remove more weighted signification intended by the speaker. Just as I could rewrite this blog post without my own use of emphasis, but it removes the control I have to focus my reader on a specific word or phrase, like the above definition.


Again, flexibility is key here. Going into this textual exploration I thought I was going to look at word counts throughout the text, meaning I would need a clean text. Finding these underscores brought me quite quickly to a crossroads: remove the underscores and continue this path, or look more closely at the underscores. This meant that I would need to systematically identify these characters regardless, and then choose whether to remove or research them.
I could easily change my interest because the tools available to me *allow* for such flexibility. This post will proceed into my curiosity of emphasis, but I could also quite quickly go back to this text, remove the underscores, and study word frequency if I so desired.

My interest in the underscores came from several follow-up questions: _What words were being emphasized? Who was doing the emphasizing?_ My own understanding of western society's predilection towards 'emotional women' and 'reasonable men' had me wondering if women would be overrepresented in the visual representation of verbal emphasis in the characters' vernacular. 

To find out, I pasted the entirety of Pride and Prejudice into Regular Expressions 101 and thought about what my search terms would be. The emphasized words were both uppercase and lowercase, so I needed an expression that would catch multiple patterns. My notation is below:

 \_[A-Z][a-z]+\_ \|  \_[a-z]+\_  \|  \_[A-Z]\_

Essentially, I asked the program to look for words inside of underscores. The first third  \_[A-Z][a-z]+\_ is looking for one uppercase letter followed by an undetermined amount of lowercase letters (one or more), while the second third \_[a-z]+\_ is looking for a completely lowercase word with an undetermined amount of lowercase letters (one or more). Finally, the last third of my notation \_[A-Z]\_ searches for a single uppercase letter, that would have been left out of my previous search because they are not followed by a lowercase letter.\** The vertical bar "\|" (Which is not an uppercase "i") is an "or" symbol in this notation, meaning that the notation will curate data all at the same time. It is looking for patterns that will match Group 1 *or* Group 2 *or* Group 3 of my notation. Each group corresponds with a segment of my notation.  Coincidentally, the application actually crashed from carrying out the complex search on such a long text, so I ended up searching for each of these data sets individually.

I found 38 matches of emphasis around a capitalized word (such as \_You\_ ), 382 matches of emphasis around a fully lowercase word (such as \_may\_ ), and 22 matches of emphasis around a single character uppercase word (every instance was \_I\_ ). Already, the implication that emphasis generally occurs _within_ the sentence structure and only rarely occurs at the _beginning_ (indicated by the capitalization— in this instance the lack thereof) reveals the way Austen's characters speak, and may even be indicative of Austen's time period. Though anecdotally, I am realizing that my own need for emphasis also falls within, and not at the beginning of, my sentences on this blog.

With all of this information, I soon realized this was a much bigger project than a blog post, so I decided to just look at the instances of an emphasized "I". I believed that the visual emphasis of the self, of the speaker, could be indicative of identified importance (perhaps egotism, perhaps earned importance) and I was set on investigating this dynamic in particular. Through Regular Expressions 101 I could click on each of my matches and see them in their original contexts. Again, I only looked at "Group 3" which was my matched singular, uppercase, letters (which all happened to be "I"). I marked who was speaking and who they were speaking to in each of the 22 circumstances.

This exercise revealed to me that out of the 22 instances, only 3 were made by men, and only 2 were verbal (the 3rd is an instance of Darcy emphasizing "I" in a written letter). In comparison, 19 emphasized "I" were made by women, all spoken. 41% of all emphasized "I's" were spoken by Elizabeth Bennet, the main character, while 45% were spoken by female side characters and only a mere 14% were spoken or written by male side characters. Women do indeed seem to be overrepresented in communicating through/with emphasis. 

I am overextending my character limit for a 'blog post' type of read so I will conclude with this thought: *Does this research indicate a gender divide in speech?* I think I would need to compare the 14% male emphasis of "I" to the percentage of overall emphasis, as well as to the overall percentage of speech in general. Furthermore, while this was a great exercise into what digital tools can do and a great exercise in thinking critically about digital results, I think comparing this text to a larger corpus of texts that also contain visual emphasis is needed before making any claims.

\**Shoutout to my mom, who I called on the phone and talked about this project with around my midway point. I was explaining Regular Expression and my mathematical notation of syntax patterns that I had created, which at the time had only contained notation from Groups 1 and 2. She was the one who asked about single character uppercase emphasis and I realized I had not written my expression to catch these instances! I had not seen single-character emphasis in my skim of the text and it had not occurred to me to try and catch this information. I added the third piece to my notation expecting zero matches and was surprised at what I might have missed! This information, that I had dismissed as a possibility, lead me to investigate further.

**Bibliography**

Austen, Jane.  *Pride and Prejudice*.  Project Gutenberg,  2008.  Thomas Edgerton,  1813. [www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/1342](www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/1342). Accessed 8 October 2020.